Engineering Management
"letter": EM 
"number": 224  
"name": Informatics and Software Development  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": This course deals with the challenges associated with the variety and volume of information encountered in today’s workplace,
and working with others in a software development environment. Students will analyze and work with both structured and
semi-structured data, using the python programming language. Students will learn about the types of software development
environments they are likely to encounter in their careers. The capstone of the course is a small-group project that analyzes
real-world data to answer a business or research question. 
"prerequisites": 
"corequisites": EM 275
"letter": EM 275  
"name": Project Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": This course presents the tools and techniques for project definition, work breakdown, estimating, resource planning,
critical path development, scheduling, project monitoring and control and scope management. Students will use project
management software to accomplish these tasks. In addition, the student will become familiar with the responsibilities, skills
and effective leadership styles of a good project manager. The role organization design plays in project management will also
be addressed.
"letter": EM 
"number": 301  
"name": Accounting & Business Analysis  ( 4 - 3 - 3 )
"description": This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts of financial and managerial accounting, with an emphasis
on actions managers can take to more effectively address the goals of the firm. Key topics covered include the preparation
and analysis of financial statements, particularly creating cash flow statements needed for engineering economic analysis;
consideration of variable costs, fixed costs, cost of goods sold, operating costs, product costs, period costs; job costing
and process costing; application of accounting information for decision-making: marketing decisions, production decisions;
capital budgeting: depreciation, taxation; budgeting process, master budgets, flexible budgets, analysis of budget variances;
asset valuation, and inventory costing. The laboratory portion of the course provides the student opportunity to use the
personal computer for solving problems related to the major topics of the course, such as spreadsheet analysis, and in
addition covers managerial topics, including sessions focused on group dynamics and teamwork, research using the Internet
and business ethics
"letter": EM 
"number": 322  
"name": Engineering Design VI  ( 2 - 1 - 2 )
"description": This course is an integral part of the Engineering Management program - it provides students with experience and tools for new
product/process development. Students will participate in a semester long class project meant to provide the students with
insights that will serve to improve their senior project experience. Participation will be in small groups, and will complement
EM385. Students will explore the detail design through validation in the systems engineering lifecycle. Tools that have been
introduced in earlier engineering management courses may be brought together as part of this pre senior design experience.
Students will be required to maintain an engineering notebook throughout the course. Prerequisites: E 321 Corequisites:
EM 345, EM 385
"letter": EM 
"number": 345  
"name": Modeling and Simulation  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": This course covers contemporary decision support models of forecasting, optimization and simulation for management.
Students will learn how to identify the problem situation, choose the appropriate methods, collect the data and find the
solution. The course also covers handling the information and generating alternative decisions based upon operations
Stevens Institute of Technology • 2016-2017 438
SCHOOL OF SYSTEMS AND ENTERPRISES
research optimization, statistical simulation, and systems dynamic forecasting. Computer simulations will be performed on
PCs using user-friendly graphical interface with multimedia report generation for visualization and animation. Students will
also be trained in management simulations for group decision support. Prerequisites: EM 365
"letter": EM 
"number": 357  
"name": Elements of Operations Research  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": Application of forecasting and optimization models to typical engineering management situations and problems. Topics
include: optimization theory and its special topics (linear programming, transportation models, and assignment models),
dynamic programming, forecasting models, decision trees, game theory, and queuing theory. Applications to resource
allocation, scheduling and routing, location of facilities, and waiting lines will be covered. Prerequisites: EM 365
"letter": EM 
"number": 360  
"name": Operations Management and Process Engineering  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": The aim of the course is to provide an introduction to major business process problems, issues with a focus on process
solutions that confront managers in highly competitive manufacturing and service environments. The course provides
students with conceptual frameworks and qualitative/quantitative tools to deal with these issues. The course also explores the
interconnections between business strategy and business processes. A rigorous introduction is provided for people aspiring
to a career in designing and managing business processes, or for people aspiring to enter the management consulting world.
"letter": EM 
"number": 364  
"name": Statistics For Engineers Laboratory  ( 1 - 0 - 1 )
"description": This one credit course is the lab component of EM 365. The lab provides an integrated experience with statistics and
probability on real and manipulated data sets using flipped classroom and project based learning environments . Those
students who have taken E 243 at Stevens, or have other credit for statistics, are still required to take this one credit EM
Statistics lab. Prerequisites: Corequisites: EM 365
"letter": EM 
"number": 365  
"name": Statistics for Engineering Managers  ( 4 - 3 - 2 )
"description": Provides a working knowledge of basic statistics as it is most often applied in engineering. Topics include: fundamentals of
probability theory, review of distributions of special interest in statistics, analysis and enumeration of data, linear regression
and correlation, statistical design of engineering experiments, completely randomized design, randomized block design,
factorial experiments, engineering applications and use of the computer as a tool for statistical analysis.
"letter": EM 
"number": 385  
"name": Innovative System Design  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
"description": This project-based course addresses the fundamentals of systems engineering. Principles and concepts of systems
engineering within a life-cycle perspective are presented through case studies and applied throughout the course to a
student-selected team project. The initial focus is on the understanding of business drivers for systems engineering and the
generation of innovative ideas. Students then engage in analysis, synthesis, and evaluation activities as they progress through
the conceptual and preliminary design phases. Emphasis is placed on tools and methodologies for system evaluation during
all phases of the design process with the goal of enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of deployed systems as well as
reducing operational and support costs. Prerequisites: Corequisites: EM 365
"letter": EM 
"number": 423  
"name": Engineering Design VII  ( 3 - 0 - 8 )
"description": This year long two-course sequence involves the students in a small-team Engineering Management project. The problem for
the project is taken from industry, business, government or a not-for-profit organization. Each student team works with a client
and is expected to collect data, analyze it and develop a design by the end of the first semester. In the second semester the
design solution of the problem is completed and a written report is submitted for binding. During the year, oral and written
progress reports are presented to peers and clients. The total project involves the application of the subject areas covered in the
EM 385 Engineering Management Laboratory course, as well as skills learned in the other technical and non-technical courses
of the Engineering Management curriculum. Prerequisites: EM 275, and EM 301, and EM 322, and EM 345, and EM 385
"letter": EM 
"number": 424  
"name": Engineering Design VIII  ( 3 - 0 - 8 )
"description": This year long two-course sequence involves the students in a small-team Engineering Management project. The problem
for the project is taken from industry, business, government or a not-for-profit organization. Each student team works with a
client and is expected to collect data, analyze it and develop a design by the end of the first semester. In the second semester
the design solution of the problem is completed and a written report is submitted for binding. During the year, oral and written
progress reports are presented to peers and clients. The total project involves the application of the subject areas covered in
the EM 385 Engineering Management Laboratory course, as well as skills learned in the other technical and non-technical
courses of the Engineering Management curriculum. Prerequisites: EM 385
EM 450  Logistics and Supply Chain Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course will provide an introduction to supply chains, logistics & supply chain management. Topics covered include
supply chain performance and metrics related to facilities, inventory, transportation, sourcing, pricing and information.
Design of distribution networks, forecasting, and planning of demand & supply would be covered. Contemporary topics like
e-business, IT and global supply chains would also be covered. Prerequisites: EM 357 or BT 223
EM 451  Analysis of Networks & Strategies  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course is designed to help with understanding the complexity, structure and dynamics of a highly connected world. It
takes an interdisciplinary look at economics, sociology, information science and applied mathematics to discuss some of
the fundamental features of networks and their behavior. The course is designed to equip students with a modeling lens to
analyze, quantify and reason about structures, dynamics and evolution of complex networks. Key topics that are covered in
the course are mathematical description of complex networks, fundamental measures of network structure, diffusion and
cascading, voting and economic and market implications. The course will also have a particular emphasis on game theory as
the method to model resource allocation in networks in the presence of autonomous agents. Prerequisites: EM 365
EM 489  Data-Mining and Risk Assessment  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course will use tools and techniques which have proven to be of value in recognizing patterns, making predictions, and
evaluation risk from both large data sets (using data-mining techniques), and small data sets (using networks constructed
from problem definition and discovery). Both approaches are critical to today’s engineers and managers, because they span
a range of possible data availability and reliability. Using these tools and techniques, the student will survey applications, and
have hands-on experimenttaion with both data mining and network construction, using real-world examples and situations.
Prerequisites: EM 224, and EM 365
EM 498  Research in Engineering Management I  ( - - )
Individual investigation of a substantive character undertaken at an undergraduate level under the guidance of a member of
the departmental faculty. A written report is required. Hours to be arranged with the faculty advisor. Prior approval required.
This course can be used as a general elective. EM 498 and EM 499 cannot be taken simultaneously.
EM 499  Research In Engineering Management II  ( - - )
Individual investigation of a substantive character undertaken at an undergraduate level under the guidance of a member of
the departmental faculty. A written report is required. Hours to be arranged with the faculty advisor. Prior approval required.
This course can be used as a general elective. EM 498 and EM 499 cannot be taken simultaneously.
EM 585  Introduction to Systems Architecture and Design  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
EM 585 builds on EM 385 and gives the student a practical introduction to Systems Architecture and Design. Lectures will
introduce the students to the motivation for System Architecture and Design, the different views on a System Architecture,
as well as theory and best practices on behavioral definition, logical and physical partitioning, and interface definitions. Key
aspects of system verification and validation will also be discussed. Tutorials will give the students practical experience using
SySML and a commercial modeling tool to model system architectures. The students will apply the principles on a team
project, designing and building a robot. Pre-requisite EM 385 or instructor approval. Prerequisites: EM 385
EM 600  Engineering Economics and Cost Analysis  ( 3 - 0 - 0 )
This course presents advanced techniques and analysis designed to permit managers to estimate and use cost information
in decision making. Topics include: historical overview of the management accounting process, statistical cost estimation,
cost allocation, and uses of cost information in evaluating decisions about pricing, quality, manufacturing processes (e.g.,
JIT, CIM), investments in new technologies, investment centers, the selection process for capital investments, both tangible
and intangible, and how this process is structured and constrained by the time value of money, the source of funds, market
demand, and competitive position. Cross-listed with: PME 600, MGT 618
EM 605  Elements of Operations Research  ( 3 - 0 - 0 )
This course brings a strong modeling orientation to bear on the process of obtaining and utilizing resources to produce
and deliver useful goods and services so as to meet the goals of the organization. Decision-oriented models such as linear
programming, inventory control, and forecasting are discussed and then implemented utilizing spreadsheets and other
commercial software. A review of the fundamentals of statistical analysis oriented toward business problems will also be
conducted.
EM 612  Project Management of Complex Systems  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This project-based course exposes students to tools and methodologies useful for forming and managing an effective
engineering design team in a bussiness environment. Topics covered will include: personality profiles for creating teams with
balanced diversity; computational tools for project coordination and management; real time electronic documentation as a
critical design process variable; and methods for refining project requirements to ensure that the team addresses the right
problem with the right solution.
EM 622  Decision Making via Data Analysis Techniques  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course provides a hands-on introduction to the modern techniques for visualizing data and leverages such techniques
with the corresponding problem solving skills necessary to complement data visualization into specific strategic decision
making. The student will first learn to use the latest off the shelf software for data visualization. In specific the student will
learn the following languages: R, D3, Google refine and Spot fire.
EM 623  Data Science and Knowledge Discovery  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course provides an hands-on introduction to the major techniques and solutions to discover knowledge in data and text.
Traditional data mining along with text mining and network analysis will be presented and will be used by the students via
open source software, addressing information mining needs on both structured and unstructured data.
EM 624  Informatics for Engineering Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course enables the Engineering Management student to acquire the knowledge and skills he/she will need to handle the
variety and volume of information encountered in today’s workplace. The course uses Python, which is rapidly becoming the
language of choice for information handling and data analysis. Students will work with both structured and semi-structured data.
EM 630  Introduction to Complexity and Dynamic Systems  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course will introduce and explore complexity and chaos, and investigate a broad range of examples from both natural
(biological) and man-made systems. Complex systems, distinct from, but related to, complicated systems, display a range of
behaviors. One of the most distinguishing of these behaviors is emergence - behavior that is not predictable from knowledge
of specific, individual agent capabilities. In addition, systems are said to be complex when emergent behavior is not resulting
from a central control, when they display chaotic characteristics, and when the systems have more frequent occurrences of
rare events, especially when initial conditions vary. This course will study and model complex and adaptive (as well as non-
adaptive) systems, and will present and discuss the characteristics of complex and chaotic systems. Prerequisites: E 243,
and MA 221
EM 650  Quality and Process Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
Principles and techniques of total quality management (TQM) with emphasis on their application to technical organizations.
Topics include management philosophy, concepts and critique of quality “Gurus”; TQM modeling and strategy; TQM tools and
techniques; Dept. of Defense 5000.51-G TQM guides; review and critique of the Deming and Baldrige Awards; concurrent
engineering; quality function, deployment and design for cost. Students will form teams to analyze a case study involving
TQM concepts and techniques (Formerly EM750).
EM 665  Integrated Supply Chain Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course illustrates the theory and practice of designing and analyzing supply chains. It provides tool sets to identify key
drivers of supply chain performance such as inventory, transportation, information and facilities. Recognizing the interactions
between the supply and demand components, the course provides a methodology for implementing integrated supply
chains, enabling a framework to leverage these dynamics for effective product/process design and enterprise operations.
EM 680  Designing and Managing the Development Enterprise  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
This course addresses the design of the peopled-system that is responsible for designing and testing a product or operational
system. There are three keys to designing the development system that are emphasized as part of this course: the fact that
the design process should be a discovery process, the critical feedback and control activities that must be implemented
for cost-discovery process, the critical feedback and control activities that must be implemented for cost-effective success,
and the design of risk management(with an emphasis on adaptive testing) activities. This course will focus on the functional
processes that must be performed by the development system, but will also address physical resources(people and software)
and associated organizational structures.
EM 690  Selected Topics in Engineering Management  ( 3 - 3 - 0 )
Selected topics from various areas within Engineering Management.
EM 800  Special Problems in Engineering Management (ME)  (3 - - )
Three credits for the degree of Master of Engineering (Engineering Management). This course is typically conducted as a
one-on-one course between a faculty member and a student. A student may take up to two special problems course in a
master’s degree program. A department technical report is required as the final product for this course.
EM 801  Special Problems in Engineering Management (PhD)  (3 - - )
Three credit for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. This course is typically conducted as a one-on-one investigation of a
topic of particular interest between a faculty member and a student and is often used to explore topical areas that can serve
as a dissertation. A student may take up to two special problems course in a Ph.D. degree program. A department technical
report is required as the final product for this course.
EM 810  Special Topics in Engineering Management  ( 3 - - )
Selected topics from various areas within Engineering Management. This course is typically taught to more than one student
and often takes the form of a visiting professor’s course. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
EM 900  Thesis in Engineering Management (ME)  (1 to 6 - - )
For the degree of Master of Engineering (Engineering Management). A minimum of six credit hours is required. Hours and
credit to be arranged.
EM 960  Research in Engineering Management (PhD)  (- - )
Original work, which may serve as the basis for the dissertation, required for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. A minimum
of 30 hours of EM 960 research is required for the Ph.D. degree. Hours and credits to be arranged